Craig: Hi, I'm Craig Smith, and this is Eye on
AI. This week, I talk to Oriol Vinyals, who leads
DeepMind’s deep learning team, about AlphaCode,
his group’s code-writing language model,
and DeepMind’s winding road toward
artificial general intelligence.
Before we begin, I want to mention
our sponsor, ClearML, a collaborative
open source MLOps solution. They're sponsoring
the podcast. They offer an end-to-end system for
building and deploying machine-learning
models. Check them out at clear.ml.
Tell them Eye on AI sent you.
Craig: Meanwhile, I hope you find the
conversation with Oriol as interesting as I did.
Craig: Okay. So, Oriol I have to ask you a couple
of things: one, what's the significance
of the big black bear behind you, and two,
I'm curious about the meaning of your first name.
Oriol: Right? The bear behind me actually traveled
all the way back from California, where I did my
PhD at UC Berkeley, which has as a mascot a bear.
Oriol: And then it's a good question about
the Oriol name. It's a Catalan name. I'm
from Barcelona originally, and I believe it
doesn't have any translation to Spanish. It's
a compound name, which is Joseph-Oriol.
Oriol: But again, it's a very local name
from Barcelona.
Craig: Okay.
And I know you've given your background many times
before, but that's generally how I like to start.
So, you are a Spanish by birth.
Oriol: Yes.
Craig: Can you talk a little bit about your
education and then how you got to DeepMind?
Oriol: Yeah, certainly. So, I did my undergraduate
degree in Barcelona where I'm from, then moved to
the US where I lived for probably 10 years. I did
my masters at UC San Diego, so, in California,
and then moved to do my PhD in a bit
more northern California in Berkeley,
where I did the PhD starting in 2009.
Oriol: It was a very interesting time because
machine learning was definitely not as popular,
deep learning certainly wasn't very popular. So,
it was a unique experience to be in a
university environment but discovering a
lot of what was going on in the field. And
there were only a very few people that I
was able to hang out with at the university.
Oriol: But luckily, I did a few internships
also doing my PhD, many of which were at Microsoft
Research in Redmond in Washington state. And that
is where I met also a lot of students from Geoff
Hinton's lab, where it sparked my interest in deep
learning, which I then exported to Berkeley.
Oriol: And then in 2013, I finished my PhD.
I did my very last internship at Google in Google
Brain. It was a fun time because Geoff Hinton
was an intern himself as well, actually, at the
time. We had both internships at the same time.
And then after graduating, I joined Google Brain,
which was very small compared to what it is now.
I worked there for a few years and
then moved to DeepMind in 2016,
back in London, back in Europe where I'm from.
Craig: Yeah. Yeah. You were an intern at Microsoft
the same time as Ilya Sutskever, is that right?
Oriol: Yes. Yes, many of my friends I met through
Microsoft Research internships, including Ilya
Sutskever, Alex Krzyzewski, George Dahl, and many
of these folks and then you would obviously hang
out in conferences in the very small workshops
that we held in deep learning at the time.
Oriol: And yeah, many friendships started through
internships and of course at school as well.
Craig: Yeah, it's remarkable. I just had
Andrew Ng on the podcast and he talked about
those days when Geoff Hinton was his intern. Yeah.
My conversation is a little less technical
than many of those that you've had.
Craig: I'd like to start with AlphaCode and I'm
particularly interested in AlphaCode because
I'm not a coder. And I've
talked to a lot of people about
no code and low code platforms that are emerging.
Craig: I'm wondering where that's going.
And I hear a lot of skepticism about,
applications of things like AlphaCode because
of the limitations and the actual complexity of
useful code. And then I'd also like to hear
a little bit about DeepMind’s work on large
language models, which are the rage right now.
Craig: And whether there's a relationship between
RETRO, I believe is DeepMind's large language
model, and AlphaCode. And then where does the
research go from there? So, if you can just talk,
I won't interrupt very much, about how AlphaCode
started. What is the purpose of that research?
Craig: What are the likely applications, if any
of the AlphaCode model and how it
relates to large language models
and then where does it go from there?
Oriol: Great. Yeah, I'm happy to talk
you through a bit of a few of these projects
that you might be learning from our blog and
the news that comes up from the lab.
Oriol: So AlphaCode in particular,
If I have to trace its inception, it starts
actually doing another project that we ran
a couple of years ago called AlphaStar, where
we were building an agent to play a video game,
StarCraft, that I actually am very passionate
about. And the fact of the matter is we've been
using a lot of these sort of benchmarks that
humans found interesting through many years,
as a sort of benchmarks themselves as well for
our agents and the technology we developed.
Oriol: So, one of the sorts of trajectories
you can trace back if you look at DeepMind's
history and certainly many of the successes in
the field is to see which benchmarks exist and
what's the performance improvements over
those. Obviously, DeepMind started perhaps
most notoriously with Atari playing Atari games.
Oriol: And then StarCraft was perhaps the last
game, which was a step up in complexity. And
Go was maybe an intermediate between those two.
So AlphaGo being another very famous of course
project that the world learned about a few years
ago. So AlphaCode, in a way from a techniques
perspective actually borrowed a lot of past
research and that's actually one, maybe one
meta point I would like to make very early that
I'm leading the deep learning team.
Oriol: So deep learning, I find it quite useful
to see it as a toolbox, right? So, the toolbox is
ever expanding. There's new research, new papers
come out, people share code, share insights,
and you're adding this tool now to your toolbox.
And then anytime there's a hard challenge out
there, what's happened now, the revolution, so
to speak, in deep learning is that you can go and
seek in the toolbox and find patterns, find past
problems you've solved, things that were useful.
Oriol: Take them out of this toolbox and then
reapply them to a new domain. So
AlphaCode, in fact, borrows a lot
of the things we learned doing AlphaStar
because it uses, in fact, it connects also
with language models because it first learns what
code looks like. Coding is no less than a sequence
of words that happen to conform a program.
Oriol: So that sort of same principle applies to
coding, and it applies to the game of StarCraft
as well because playing a game is no less than
issuing a sequence of instructions that look a
bit like code, actually, move this piece up on
the board here, et cetera, et cetera. At the time
we were doing AlphaStar, coding seemed like a very
interesting challenge. And when you look at a
domain like coding or programming in general,
one of the things you want to do, is there
any existing benchmark in that domain
that will serve the purpose of, can we do this
with the current tools we have in the toolbox?
Oriol: If yes. Then it's useful to know.
If not, maybe we'll invent new tools
to be added for further projects that go beyond
what we do towards AGI. So, with that in mind,
looking at coding in particular, there are
a few things you could imagine doing with an
AI to enhance software engineering, but we
went perhaps the more traditional route we
had been doing with games, like Atari, Go and
StarCraft, which is look at the very serious
competition that has not been designed for AIs
to compete in, take that platform, hopefully a
popular one where humans really have expanded and
try to exhaust all the skills that humanity that
programmers have developed and then participate
in it to see where we are in this benchmark.
Oriol: And that's where we thought about
a coding contest or coding competition as
the platform to do such a challenge, which
is fairly unique and fairly different than
perhaps other work that regards more about
completion of code or trying to assist
coding in some sort of, oh, I don't
know about this language or this API,
and then you have a smart way to access that.
Oriol: Instead of doing that, what we did is code
competitions, which in a nutshell can be described
as, there is a problem statement. It's almost like
an exam that you would do at school. So,
there's some sort of story that tells you about,
explains what an algorithm should
be doing in words, in plain words.
Oriol: So, it's natural language at the input.
And then humans usually take this description.
This description contains a few examples, right?
Oh, like for example, if the input to this program
you're about to write is this, the output should
be that. And then from this description humans
basically put a few hours trial and error, right?
Oriol: They code, they code some Python, C++,
or whatever popular language they choose
to. They code the solution. Then they
submit it to a web server that then has
some secret tests that would evaluate, hey,
is this program fast enough, importantly, and
also, correct. So, we thought that's great.
Oriol: There's actually tens of thousands
of participants in weekly competitions.
People that take these competitions very
seriously, by extremely clever coders. So,
we took these as the sort of benchmark and the
result was that we achieved median performance,
meaning average human that competes in this.
So that's a bit what happened in AlphaCode in
terms of the result and a bit of background.
Craig: Yeah, AlphaCode uses the transformer
algorithm as the core. Does it draw at
all on RETRO, on a large language model?
Oriol: Yeah. So, this is a good question.
Oriol: So first of all,
actually AlphaStar, AlphaFold, AlphaCode and all
the large language model work you're seeing from
DeepMind and obviously from many other labs, use
transformers, which is one of these tools that we
added in the toolbox in 2017. It's a very powerful
neural network that allows you to model sequences.
Oriol: Basically, you input the sequence and the
transformer does a transformation - it's actually
a good name - on top of it to then predict
either, whether the sequence is, I don't know,
a positive or a negative sentence in natural
language processing, or what's the 3D coordinate
of a protein or an atom in the protein or, in
the coding case or language case in general,
it predicts what's the next level that proceeds
the code. So, it indeed uses transformers.
Retro is actually a particular language model
that uses an extra, an additional idea. So,
it expands a transformer with a large memory
bank. Basically, you're trying to predict the
next word. So, you're seeing a few letters,
maybe of a program you're trying to predict.
Oriol: What's the next letter that you should
write to make this program, correct? But then
critically it indexes a large dataset of
lines, like trillions of documents to retrieve
relevant information. And this is another tool
in the toolbox, in fact, the retrieval process
that enables models to become as good as bigger
models, but at much less parameter count.
Oriol: In the coding example, we actually tried
some of these ideas because it's very natural
to think, hey, when you're coding something,
you actually retrieve, you search for similar
algorithms or try to inform yourself about
what the code might look like. And in fact,
in these competitions, that's very commonly done.
Oriol: But, in actuality, we found this to not be
so useful for AlphaCode in particular. But then
the Retro paper showed its capabilities on just
regular language models. And in our large
language models research, this is an active
area to expand this toolbox, to make it more
useful, to essentially supercharge transformers
to access this memory bank a bit like us.
Oriol: We are supercharged by Google search.
When we're looking for information, we
don't remember everything, right? So,
this idea behind RETRO is actually more a new tool
that's still a work in progress. We published,
of course, a paper. There's
some activity in research. But
in AlphaCode, in particular, it didn't help.
Oriol: So, we just use the plain transformer.
Craig: I see. So AlphaCode
itself is a large language model.
Oriol: So how did we create AlphaCode?
The step and maybe that's where most
of the inspiration came from, was AlphaStar.
We thought about the same process as we
created for these agents that played the game.
Oriol: The first step is imitating humans,
right? So large language models, take
a large data set of language sequences,
and try to imitate the statistics of what
will come next after each letter or word,
train a big model, and then that's what you're
seeing these days in large language models. The
way that we did AlphaStar was actually the same.
Oriol: We had sequences of actions, these actions
that I mentioned, move this unit here, move
these unit there. We trained a large transformer,
an LSTM model - it’s a different recurrent neural
network that is also very popular – to imitate
human actions, but human actions, human
words that are in some data set. They're
essentially the same or mapped to one another.
Oriol: So, in AlphaCode, the first step,
like in AlphaStar, was to pre-train an agent that
was able to imitate human moves. In this case,
of course, this is a very language centric task.
We took GitHub, which is a massive repository of
human code, and then we said, hey,
let's start from pre-training on this
large amount of data, so that we have a
first transformer model that is able to
produce code that looks reasonable.
Oriol: And this is actually a key
ingredient of maybe all of these
tools that could potentially help
software engineers to auto-complete but be much
more than auto-complete. So that's the first step
of AlphaCode. But now the crucial step, there's
two extra sort of algorithmic things you do. Once
you have this pre-trained amount of knowledge,
this is mostly knowing how to continue programs,
but it does not know about this particular
format, which is, I'll give you a long language
description of the algorithm you should be doing.
Oriol: And then please just generate code that
is correct. Period. There's no ambiguity
in the metrics, which is very important.
And probably when you talked to Pushmeet
actually about AlphaFold and many other examples,
having a good metric and a good benchmark
is critical to assess advancements.
So, similar to there, we collected all the data
that exists in these platforms, in these websites
that people have been competing in for many years.
Oriol: So, we'd actually talked to the creator of
one of these platforms. And this person was
very excited actually to see what an AI could
do. They really thought it would be impossible
to do anything reasonable, which is always a
good sign when you work on these projects. And we
collected, let's say 15,000 examples. It's not a
large amount of data in machine learning, right?
Oriol: 15,000 is actually smaller than MNIST,
right? This very popular data set that sparked
some of the early work on convolutional neural
networks. So, we created this specialized
data set of input-output examples,
15,000 of them, which contained the language
description. And then the code that could be
tens or hundreds of lines of code that implement
a solution to that particular problem from past
competitions, right? Then we took these massive
language model that we pre-train, we fine tune it,
which is actually a very common tool again, in the
toolbox. If you will, this is a common practice,
you will do with neural nets. We fine tune it, to
be good at this particular setting, so to speak.
Oriol: Although honestly, I was skeptical and
surprised to see that with such small amount of
data, we were able to indeed steer this model,
this transformer model to now become not very
good at, but it started to be reasonable
at solving some of the easiest problems.
And once you see something promising, that is
when you start iterating, you start developing
new sort of components, new tools, new algorithmic
insights. And basically, we started from solving
maybe 2% of the problem, the test set we
had collected from this website through
many innovations, to the 34% or so, a solve rate
that made us believe this might be at human level.
At which point we took that neural network and
actually placed it in the web server competition.
Oriol: After a competition was held, we
entered, and we then measured ourselves.
So, the last, very step though, that
was needed besides some innovation,
some techniques that are perhaps very deep in
the toolbox, not so generic yet, but we might
be using them in further projects, of course,
was the idea that came from actually AlphaGo,
which is the idea of search. You have this
natural description, natural language description.
You can generate one program, but you can generate
10 programs or 50 or a hundred or a thousand. And
then the question is to find a program that looks
promising enough that you will bother to go to the
web server and submit it. We don't, we didn't want
to submit millions of programs to the web server.
Oriol: We actually thought 10 attempts is
maybe the max that we will attempt to at most,
since that felt reasonable and talking to the
creator of the website also thought that seems
reasonable as well. So, we created many different
program possibilities by essentially sampling the
language model almost let's say a million times.
Oriol: And then we developed something very
similar to what the value functions
do in, for instance, AlphaGo, which is
what is the programs we should be picking out
of these millions of programs that we should
submit. So, then we developed a few techniques to
filter down all these programs, that some of them
didn't compile, but some of them did compile
and some of them pass the test we knew about,
but we didn't know if they were correct.
Oriol: So, we filtered them down
to 10 at most. And then we submitted to the server
and the results we got, I think impressed really
like many people that probably have quite
a lot of knowledge about machine learning
and then this programming contest. But at the
same time, I think what's cool about this is,
it's human level, but it's not at the top
level. And there is still a long gap and
a long way to go. In a way, this is almost the
beginning where we have a very good benchmark.
We think this benchmark tests reasoning,
problem-solving abilities, et cetera. And
the transformer is a great tool, but maybe
we need better tools or enhancing tools
to then climb this ladder or leaderboard.
Oriol: That is one of the many that exist
of course, in the machine learning community.
Craig: Yeah. Yeah. I have a couple of
questions. The pre-training on GitHub
that's an unsupervised task, right?
Oriol: Yes. There is a potential debate what
unsupervised means. So, I want to maybe just
maybe explain. So, typically it is unsupervised in
the sense that this is a dataset that exists. And
you just take, let's say a large collection of
programs that were written for whatever purposes.
And you just learn a system that will predict
what is the next word or token or character.
And in that sense, it is unsupervised because we
didn't label this data set, we didn't do any extra
work on it. But in a way it might be supervised
because this is, someone wrote that code and
it's not random programs, right? These programs
were not randomly generated. But I would say,
yeah, this is an unsupervised pre-training step
that most language models undertake these days.
Craig: But the second step of then
training on the competition set
that's in effect a labeled data set because you
have scores for how well the different programs
performed and that sort of thing.
Oriol: Yeah. So, the second step,
maybe the best sort of parallel to trace
here is with that of machine translation.
Oriol: So, imagine we know we can get
a lot of English text on the internet.
We can get a lot of Spanish texts as well. So
that would be what we did in pre-training. We
got a lot of Python and C++ texts, and we just
trained the model on that. But then we needed to
know how to translate, and it is a very good way
to put it, actually. How to translate this natural
language description high-level description,
translate that to an algorithmic solution in
Python or C++, the two languages we focused on for
no reason then other than that, they are popular.
Oriol: So, the second data set needs
to be paired, right? This needs to have
on the one hand, the description, and the other
hand, you have the solution for that description
that someone brought with other intents. So
maybe that of course constitutes what we would
call supervised sequence-to-sequence learning,
which is actually a project that I worked on with
folks at Google Brain a long time ago for
machine translation initially, but which has been
applied to many other sorts of domains, right?
Oriol: You can translate English to Spanish.
You can translate an image to text. You can
translate the text to an image. You can translate
a specification of a problem to the code
that solves it, right. And that's maybe
the easiest way to see it parallel to that.
Craig: Yeah. So, the purpose of AlphaStar
isn't to create an agent that
can beat everybody at StarCraft.
It's a research effort to advance the science.
And is that the same case with AlphaCode or in
AlphaCode's case is the end goal more specific
that you really want to create an agent
that can code from natural language?
Oriol: So that's a great question. I think there's
always the tension. When I think, this is actually
a very nice portrayal deep learning. We care about
the toolbox, right? So, if you think of, oh, I'm
a deep learning researcher, I'm leading the deep
learning team. What is our goal? Our goal is to
expand with more powerful tools so that any new
problem, any new domain, any new fields, right?
Like biology, like we went pretty far from machine
learning and there is more to come that we can
have the powerful tools that will be needed for
very specific domains that have very hard problems
to be solved. So, from a deep learning and perhaps
zooming out from a solving AGI standpoint, which
is ultimately what we're after at DeepMind,
absolutely the view of, these are benchmarks.
Oriol: We get a lot of good information from
them. We can generate new tools to advance, to
go to the next steps. That view is perfectly
fine. And in fact, many of these projects,
I would say, have these characteristics as
benchmarks that some of them might be solved and
we might revisit or not. And in the coding case,
now going to your second point, since there
seems to be something fundamentally difficult
about this, it's not over, we now are at the
beginning in a way of discovering how this
wonderful sort of benchmark that humans created
that challenges them intellectually, et cetera.
Oriol: How will these push the boundaries of the
techniques, but always the eye in deep learning is
these techniques will be applied to other fields
and domains. And so, this connection with all the,
you can almost connect, if you look at all the
many projects and work that goes at DeepMind,
of course from the inside it is perhaps
easier, but it is quite natural to start
seeing how these projects connect to one another.
Oriol: They connect with the techniques. They also
connect wonderfully with the teams that are behind
these projects. There's a lot to be said about, of
course, the researchers behind it. You're seeing
maybe a few of them, you get to talk to a few
of them, but it is also interesting to understand
that these teams that go behind one of these hard
goals, then will proceed to either keep iterating
over in this case, the coding one. Maybe some
people will move on to other projects and so on.
Oriol: And this is actually how
I think the field has advanced in a
way that perhaps it's a bit invisible
to those who might not be as in as we are.
Craig: Yeah. Yeah, of course. Every time
you work on a project, you carry the knowledge
to your next project. A lot of that
knowledge is not written down in papers.
Oriol: Absolutely, yeah.
Craig: But again, with AlphaCode,
because I'm not a coder and I'm fascinated
by no code solutions and low code solutions,
do you think there's a possibility that AlphaCode
could progress to the point where it could write
more complex programs?
Oriol: Yeah, absolutely. So
now going a bit deeper into coding as a
very interesting, very meta domain, right?
Oriol: You have to, we're coding to generate
these tools. These tools in the box are actually
pieces of code and so on. So, it's actually
a very dear domain to us researchers
in machine learning. So, there is
quite a lot of excitement of course,
about beyond the benchmark for towards AGI.
Oriol: Could this be just something that people
find useful? Absolutely. But we are talking to,
there's obviously a lot, also a lot of teams
across Google that are working on
similar projects. And you might
have seen also other research. That's the
beautiful part of the community, right?
So, I think we are exploring right the power,
how these techniques, maybe not the actual agent,
not AlphaCode, if we call AlphaCode the set
of weights in the neural network, but how can
we now take some of the techniques and apply them
in a setting that maybe it's more about making
software engineers more productive, et cetera.
Oriol: And I think from what I can see, there's
a very real possibility of a transformation.
It's probably going to be slower than some people
think, but that's fine, on how we do and produce
code. Will the limit of as maybe writing down the
problem like these competitions have that you want
to generate some sort of program that you just
write it in natural language, no coding required?
Oriol: And then the solution comes out at the
other end. Perhaps, AlphaCode clearly does that
with something that felt quite difficult, or it
actually was impossible just a couple of years
ago. So, could these go beyond the setting, which
is code competitions? This is a narrow domain in
a way. It's just specific kinds of algorithms.
Oriol: They're very hard, but they're just short
programs. Can we go from here to a more end to end
approach? I believe so. The question is, are
we going to focus on it? And I think for us,
the main mission is always AGI. But of course
we are lucky to have many partners and many,
that's how the field works.
Oriol: Really, actually, maybe,
you could see this advance clearly will unlock
this. And the publication process is actually
enabling others to also explore possibilities
of this kind of domain. So as a researcher
and me personally, you always are balancing how
deep are you going to go into these domain vs
well, I am a deep learning
researcher. The tools are there,
go ahead. Use them. And that's also wonderful
when that happens, which obviously has happened
as well, many times in our field.
Craig: Yup. And on this toolbox,
you've been out talking about quite a bit.
Does DeepMind have a platform that researchers
or practitioners or developers can use?
Oriol: Yeah. So, the toolbox, as I've been
referring to is clearly a sort of very virtual
toolbox of ideas, right? Like the transformer
model, knowledge distillation, LSTM, convolutional
networks. So, it's a toolbox of ideas. And then
from the idea to the actual implementation there
is indeed a lot of tools, actual tools that you
would call them in software engineering to then
develop and almost like it's like a puzzle to
work on a new application, to crack a new
benchmark, to go to like I know physics and try
to make a change there. There's a lot of very cool
things happening where people in different fields
because the tools are not only the
toolbox of ideas, but the tools
actually to run them are fairly developed.
Oriol: They can go ahead and try them. And it's
amazing to see how other fields are embracing this
approach and basically getting it. So academic
labs like ours in industry and in universities,
they're part of some ecosystem of like software,
which actually, if I think about why.
Oriol: What has happened? Why is this
so popular? Why in 2009, deep learning
wasn't as popular as now? Software,
and the actual open sourcing of platforms. That's
been a key in the community. So indeed, there's
obviously a few choices depending on what you
want to do as a practitioner and as a researcher,
but you can certainly map instantiations or,
realizations of the virtual tools to then,
any of the platforms that are very popular.
Oriol: Now, there is obviously PyTorch,
TensorFlow, JAX and the ones to come. As we say in
the field, if in five years we are using the same
tools as in software tools, something is wrong
because the field is advancing so fast that
when you create these open-source libraries that
are used, the research takes over and there's
something unexpected that you did not account for.
And sometimes you need to start from scratch and
have a new framework and a new platform.
Craig: Yeah. So, you're not personally, you're not
drilling down into the possibilities of AlphaCode
as a particular domain. Where is your research
going next or are you still working on AlphaCode.
Oriol: Yeah, that's a good question. Obviously,
we are still working on AlphaCode.
We have in the deep learning team
and obviously DeepMind in general,
we have quite a few projects. So AlphaCode,
usually when you see a publication, sometimes it's
a milestone that we hit, or a checkpoint.
Oriol: But, we keep working on it. As part of
the many projects that I oversee personally
as the leader of the deep learning team.
I've been, from a personal standpoint, I've
been very actually if I look at, when I
joined DeepMind in 2016, one of the things that I
immediately catch upon was this idea, at the time
maybe the popular name was meta-learning, which is
the idea that you can learn to learn so to speak,
right? Traditionally, in supervised learning, you
take some data set, you train a neural network,
and that neural network does something useful
like translating, transcribing speech, or
writing code. But this idea of meta learning that
you can teach a model, something new was happening
at the time through a very simplistic view of this
approach, which, at the time we obviously imagined
that this is still a very valid benchmark, right?
Oriol: That we were working on still
to advance the toolbox. But ImageNet was,
oh, there's a closed data set, thousands
of categories of objects. And there you go you
need to be more accurate in the next generation
of neural networks. But what happened
at the time is we took ImageNet, and we
invented a new task, which was, when I test your
model, I'm not going to ask you from an image,
can you classify it onto one of the thousand
objects. Instead, I'm going to give you a few
input-output examples that you've never
seen, right? New categories of objects.
And then you need to create a system that
is able to observe this information very
quickly with very little data, right?
Oriol: One example per category, perhaps,
and do well at that. And that was happening at
the time through image classification. We call
this few shot learning and then feed forward,
it turns out that these large language models
are excellent at future learning and
at learning sort of things that you can
induce at test time, so to speak, right?
Oriol: So, these models are trained to be
good at predicting these unsupervised data of
all the texts on the internet or all the code
on GitHub. But then there is a lot of research
to be done in my opinion, but a lot of exciting
opportunities for teaching this model something
new, but not learning, fine tuning is one
approach that is not the most elegant perhaps.
Oriol: So, I think what I'm now focusing more
on is these capabilities of meta-learning as
we called them back in the day. But now you
could call this few-shot learning or this ability
that you can literally have a model that you can
instruct, so to speak, just say, hey,
here is an image of these objects.
Oriol: Here is another image of these other
objects. Can you now play this game with
me? And it's a transformation of how we are
testing models in machine learning that has
been ongoing for a long time. Of course,
like this the field always has newer
benchmarks and words for describing things.
Oriol: But right now, AlphaCode is perhaps
an instantiation of that in very particular
ways, but I'm very excited about some of the
recent work also that the team has been doing
on this particular aspect where it's not only
about language, but about vision, which links very
nicely back to this idea of, hey, can we classify
these two objects from one another?
Oriol: We could at the time, but it
was a very cumbersome way to do so. Now, we
can literally not only classify but teach
almost any computer vision tasks to models by
basically showing, hey, these emails, tell me
something about it. You can ask it more and so on.
And in part of our large language models research,
the latest actually release which was just
released a few days ago was this model Flamingo,
which is a visual language model,
that knows a lot about language,
but actually is grounded in images.
Oriol: And I think that sort of link that comes
from when I joined DeepMind to say, wow, that's
amazing. I wanted to learn about reinforcement
learning. So naturally I went into projects like
AlphaStar and AlphaCode to now just say wait a
second this is something super exciting.
Oriol: So that's one of the
kinds of focuses that I'm switching my sort
of research attention towards for sure. Yeah.
Craig: Can you talk a little bit; you mentioned
a few times already AGI and DeepMind is
famous for having that as an ultimate goal.
Craig: Is there a roadmap? And you mentioned
guideposts or milestones. Do you guys sit down and
have an overall roadmap that may get dimmer the
further you get in the future of how all of these
things are contributing and how you expect them
to converge some day?
Oriol: Yeah, absolutely.
Oriol: The roadmap toward a sort of AI
that would be general that would be able to
learn with you the way I actually just described
it. That's very much in discussions, of course,
at DeepMind and in the community, that
is, how to get there. What are the right
benchmarks? And all that entails.
Oriol: I think this is basically
probably the main topic of discussion in the main
machine learning conferences, to some extent, and
certainly at DeepMind since that's our mission.
We were doing these projects with a lot of, with
the mindset that's where we're going. So that's
why perhaps it was useful to depict this level of
difficulty of perhaps single domains, right?
Oriol: Like from Atari, to chess to Go,
to StarCraft, right? That's a thread that
doesn't happen randomly. This is something that
you can see where we're going. In fact, I did
work on StarCraft back in my Berkeley days
which is a fun fact. And at the time I remember
the mindset we were not ready to do StarCraft.
Oriol: We were working on Atari in this end-to-end
fashion, like machine learning fashion. So
clearly you can see, especially externally, which
is obviously the things that you see more visibly,
you can certainly depict these little
roads that are increasing in difficulty
and impressiveness towards AGI.
Oriol: And then of course, where to go next is
the question. I remember someone, when I joined
my PhD, they said 90% of your PhD is the question
you're asking. So, it is a very hard question
to find what is the next thing on the road that
will provide progress and signal towards that.
Oriol: So indeed, we talk a lot about it, but
what you're seeing is hopefully, it's something
that will make sense when we look back. And it's
actually quite a useful exercise to actually,
for me to be talking to you because sometimes you
on the fly, you might not realize it as
easily until you connect the dots and say,
of course we were seeking this, for
instance, learning ability of the models.
Oriol: And now maybe the timing wasn't quite
ready there. Now it is. We're focusing on that
as a key capability of intelligence. So, I
would say, yes, we definitely roadmap what
it might be like to reach the goal of a
truly intelligent system like AGI would be.
Craig: Yeah. And that kind of intelligence
system would be multimodal. It would have vision,
language, agency - you'd be able to take actions.
So, the game trajectory and that's the agency
trajectory, and AlphaCode is the language
trajectory. Is that the way to think of it?
And then eventually these threads will intertwine.
Oriol: Yeah. I'm quite impressed
with the way you put it.
Oriol: I think that's actually a very nice
description of what an AGI to me personally, would
look like. There, there would be arguments to be
said that perhaps language is all you need, but
there could be arguments to say, we don't need
language, right? But from looking back at my
own research kind of passions, these clearly
is tracing by nicely what it might be like you
said, like multimodality vision and language,
and then capacity to take actions that feels
like baking ingredients. And indeed, you can see
how we advance the toolbox on these
ingredients when we work on these.
Oriol: So that's why, by the way, why do we
work on ImagNet? Because it enhances the visual
capabilities of whatever ultimate models may
come up in the future. It's still a very valid
benchmark to test those abilities in a very nicely
controlled environment. They are very well thought
out benchmarks and linking back to AlphaCode,
probably the reasoning abilities required.
They're still primitive, but the way we advance
them in part will be, hey, how are we doing
on these benchmarks? And that may stick for years,
depending of course, on the rate of progress.
Craig: Yeah. You're focused largely throughout
your career on sequence-to-sequence learning.
And there's been a lot of talk at OpenAI at
Qinghua University and some other institutes about
developing these systems for video. Being able to
describe something and have an AI system produce
video in the way that Dall-E produces an image.
Are you working on video at all in that way?
Oriol: Yeah, so personally I haven't worked on
video other than the new model that is Flamingo,
which you could think of as a language model. It
has a particular way to understand special words
that are either images or videos actually. So, we
added, basically we enhance the capacity of the
amazing language models with some borrowings from
ImageNet and vision to have them be doing both.
Oriol: Like you can input a video or an image as
part of what you're talking about with the model.
So that's maybe very recent and it included video
as inputs. And as outputs, there is definitely
lots of work to be done. It's one of the, I
remember talking to one of the professors at
Berkeley who is a very well-known computer vision
researcher about the idea of the generating.
Oriol: You only truly understand the world. If you
can take a still image and maybe generate a video
from it. So, I've been always fascinated
by this. I very lightly touched upon this
topic back when we were in the very early
days of sequence-to-sequence learning. So,
we had one, one of the benchmarks we were doing
what's called moving MNIST, which is boringly
MNIST digits that moves around - it's a
benchmark for video prediction or generation.
That was a few years ago.
Oriol: But from the recent past
at DeepMind, actually not me personally,
but there's been work that had very
nice follow-up work, in fact, connecting
nicely to the science part of our mission,
which is to advance science with AGI. So, we had
a model that was called, it's called video GANs.
Oriol: So GANs from the generative adversarial
networks and boringly, like the name is just
applied to videos and it was a fairly good model.
There's a paper out there with samples. It's,
I don't know if it's three years old or
something the paper now, and I'm sure there's
many more advances beyond. But again, connecting
these dots, this model that generated videos,
like I don’t know, short videos, clips, were the
technique behind the weather prediction efforts.
Because the recent paper that came from,
many people, including some folks in my team
thought predicting how the clouds move over
time. That's a video prediction problem.
Oriol: So, they use that technique and some
enhancements for that problem. Indeed, videos
is definitely part of actually in this case, a
solution to predicting weather. Very exciting
things to do in that domain. I actually, in my
opinion. But yeah, personally I think there's
a lot to do and it seems very exciting.
Oriol: The idea of taking a picture and
animating it. So, we'll see maybe
in the future, we'll see some of
that research happening as well in the group.
Craig: This has really been fascinating. I hope
I have the opportunity to talk again. I'd love to
meet you. I'll be going to conferences again soon.
So, thanks Oriol. I appreciate it.
Oriol: Yeah. It was my pleasure. As
I said it's quite useful, even for oneself
to just be looking back a bit more like
casually, and as you said, not from the
most technical perspective, but also
like on why do we do the projects we do.
Oriol: Thanks. Thanks, likewise, for your
excellent questions and your time.
Craig:
That's it for this week's episode. I want to
thank Oriol for his time. I also want to thank
ClearML for their support. Take
a look at what they have to
offer at clear.ml.
Craig:
And remember, the singularity may not be
near, but AI is about to change your world.
So, pay attention.